--- 
kind: article
permalink: tools-of-the-estate
created_at: 2011-01-30 19:15:19.599972 -08:00
title: Tools of the Estate
tags: 
- mac
- productivity
--- 

I've wanted to write this post for some time, but each attempt came out
sounding sort of flat and uninspiring. Now, at a altitude of 30,000 feet, free
(mostly) from distractions, I'm going to try this again with some real focus.
This will be, no doubt, one of the oddest posts I've done in a long time.  As
you may recall, [my mother passed away last
March](/posts/2010/04/17/thanks-mom/ "Thanks Mom"). Since then I inherited a
part-time job known as "Personal Representative" of her Estate. It has
consumed much of my life over the last year.

But that's not what I wanted to write about here. What I wanted to share with
you was a little bit of how I avoided going crazy while doing this. And while
I'm not completely finished with the process, the end is in sight and I can
confidently say that the tools and techniques I'm going to describe below were
a huge benefit to me.

One of the reasons I struggled so much with this post was that I had a hard
time making it not sound like some long-winded commercial for my favorite
software tools. Yes, these tools are great. But really this is about so much
more than that. It's really about the whole change in mindset and approach
that was necessary for me to get stuff taken care of.

So rather than just give you a lame, amateur impression of a MacWorld review,
let me put these tools in context. Let me start by laying out a few rules and
constraints. I have, on occasion, been prone to being a bit obsessed with the
world of so-called "productivity porn". This is the contant fiddling about
with your tools and ways of doing things that quickly eclipses your ability to
actually get any meaningful work done. It was clear to me, right away, that if
I was going to add anything to my toolbox I had to benefit from it
immediately. Similarly, any tool that required me to internalize a whole
new methodology was just not going to work.

This isn't to say that my game couldn't use some improvement.
Rather, it was a recognition of the fact that I simply don't have _time_ to
change my ways too much. I need to get stuff done. Lawyers are calling, taxes
are due and I cannot be the roadblock that holds things up.

The last principle (if we can call it that) in all of this was that both space
and time were limited resources. I had limited amounts of both and in many
cases I was willing to trade money for either. Usually this meant paying a
professional to take care of something that didn't make sense for me to do
(e.g. estate taxes, carrying out an estate sale, etc.). However, in some
cases, I had to make choices _between_ space and time. 

Scarcity of time probably makes sense, but scarcity of space may not. No
matter how frugal or simple a person may have lived, if they reached adulthood
they acquired a lot of stuff over the course of their life. Since this was my
mother, some of those things I had some emotional attachment to. But the vast
majority was "stuff" I simply didn't want or need. That didn't mean that it
wasn't my problem though. More on this later.

So, given that I already have job, how did I keep myself from going crazy
while trying to get this stuff settled?<a href="#note1"><sup>1</sup></a> In
short, I used a handful of tools (mostly software) and a lot of discipline.

# OmniFocus #
I've been a big [OmniFocus](http://www.omnigroup.com/products/omnifocus) user
since it debuted. I also have the iPhone and iPad versions. Though all three
add up to quite a premium, they all solved the biggest problem I had: having
one place to dump things I need to do and sort them out later.

OmniFocus let me dump every little thing that came up that needed attention
into a single place that I could then orchestrate into a sequence of actions
to take. Take for example, the process of filing tax returns. Depending on
where you live and when your relative passed away, you may have multiple tax
returns to file (the personal tax returns of your loved one, Estate Taxes and
fiduciary taxes for the Estate). Given that these weren't tax returns I had
_planned_ to file I suddenly had a metric s**t-ton of paperwork to locate.

So let's say that I had a task like "Get date-of-death valuations for all
investments". I would create a task in OmniFocus and give it some rough due
date. If it was something like a personal tax return that had a known due date,
I'd put that due date in. Now clearly a task like that is too big (or it least
it was too big to me). So then I would add several sub-tasks to that, one for
each financial institution that I needed to contact.

If I had more than, say, three or four sub-tasks and they were particularly
onerous, I might spread them out before the parent task's
deadline and space-out the due-dates for each child task. This turned out to
be extremely helpful because it allowed me to do a little bit each day, without
getting too discouraged. And let me tell you, there were a whole lot of tasks
on that list that I did not want to do. If I had stuffed a bunch under one
task and waited to do them until the last minute (either because I didn't see
them or because I procrastinated) it would have made completing them so much worse.

So part of this was a sort of psychological head-game I'd play with myself to
keep going. It's like what any endurance athlete does to complete a race. You
don't consider the entire course, instead you run to the next block or bike
over the next hill. _That's all you care about right now._ You can deal with
the _next_ hill after that.

Because I was often in lots of different places with a varying "kit" of
equipment, I needed to access that list from anywhere. Here, OmniFocus'
ability to sync with various "cloud services" (I use MobileMe) was a huge
help. This brings me to what I might call Golden Rule #1:

> Make sure you only have _one_ place for things.

Once you start scattering stuff around in-duplicate, the genie is out of the
bottle, and you will have a hell of a time getting it back in. When it's absolutely
_crucial_ that you stay on top of things do not use multiple
places/buckets/services to store a disjoint set of the same things. You might
find a better way to do it, but the cost of migrating while you're in
fire-fighting mode is a heavy price to pay.

So I'm not going to sit here and tell you that OmniFocus is the One True Way.
There are certainly enough to-do apps out there to choke a whale. All I can
tell you is that it was a life-saver for me.

# OmniOutliner #
So, where OmniFocus was my tool keeping myself on-track, I needed something
else to capture more permanent data. OmniFocus would have been completely
inappropriate for historical records. Once I complete a task, it's gone. So,
instead, I used
[OmniOutliner](http://www.omnigroup.com/products/omnioutliner/). 

Now there's nothing particularly special about OmniOutliner for taking notes.
In some ways, it's not really a note-taking tool at all. But if you have a
proclivity for thinking hierarchically and in outlines (which I do),
OmniOutliner is must-have. 

Being a keyboard-shortcut junkie, OmniOutliner is the
most effortless tool I've come across for capturing information and ideas in
outline form. The ability to quickly move up and down in a hierarchy _and_
move items throughout the hierarchy hasn't been done better in any app that
I've seen.

So, I have one giant OmniOutliner file called "mom's estate" that has
_everything_ in it. It has account numbers, records of every phone
conversation I had, when I sent paperwork, when I got
responses&hellip;seriously&hellip;I mean everything.

I used it most often for phone calls (which have been numerous) with
attorneys, tax accountants and financial institutions. This was one of the
areas where I need to be the most disciplined. If I ever let myself slip and
failed to write down the salient points from a conversation I had, I would
have eventually stopped doing it and lost a lot of information along the way.
Sometimes I would get a call from an attorney while I was out an about. If I
wasn't with my laptop, I'd reschedule the call until I could be where I could
put my earphones in and have my hands free to type while conversing.

This was a god-send. It helped me stay on top of things in a way I wouldn't have
been able to do with my brain alone. Also, because it was all in one place,
it was easy to search through my notes when I was talking with someone.

# In-Ear Headphones #
It sounds dumb, but I used these things all the time. In fact, I went through
two pairs during this whole ordeal. Anytime I had a call related to matters of
the Estate, I always politely asked the other party to wait while I put my
earphones in so I could take notes.

What this was really about was reducing friction as much as possible. There
was simply no part of settling the Estate that was enjoyable, but I could at
least try to reduce the pain. Just the simple ability to type while talking
meant that I took better notes, more consistently. That meant that I had more
information I could easily capture and file that I didn't have to hold in my
head. And _that_ meant more confidence in my ability to figure this stuff out and
get it done and less stress about forgetting something.

# DEVONThink Pro Office and the Fujitsu ScanSnap Scanner #
I was introduced to
[DPTO](http://www.devon-technologies.com/products/devonthink/index.html) (as
the cool-kids call it) by Ryan Davis during one of the Seattle.rb hack nights.
DPTO is an amazing, powerful, abstruse piece of software. It's exactly the
sort of thing I generally shy away from these days, but it does one thing so
extraordinarily well that I plunked down a good chunk of change and spent some
time learning its idiosyncracies.

As I began to clear out my mom's house, I eventually whittled down a lifetime
of collected paperwork to six banker's boxes. I don't have space to hold six
banker's boxes of paper in my house. Hell, I don't have space to hold the
paperwork I already have in my house. But I couldn't just get rid of the
paperwork, I needed the information. 

Enter the Fujitsu ScanSnap document scanner. Combined with DPTO, these two
form a rapid-input document scanning tool that allowed me to practically
reduce about 80 cubic feet of documentation down to a pile of bytes on a
hard-drive.

What's great about DPTO is that it has remarkable OCR technology.  It can scan
damn near any document, convert it to a PDF, and overlay searchable,
selectable text. All of those statements went from pounds of paper to
searchable bits on my harddrive. Not only did this help me save space, it also
made all of this documentation searchable which was a huge help trying to
piece-together my mother's financial picture (a necessary thing for probate
and various taxes).

Now this wasn't easy. In this case, I had to face the Sophie's Choice of
trading time for space. It took a lot of time to scan all of those documents.
So my solution was to do a little bit consistently and to do it during
"down-time". I spent a lot of football games this season with a beer, a giant
stack of documents, a paper-shredder and my document scanner.

So it sucks that I had to spend time doing it, but now I've recovered a bunch
of physical space and I've made all of these documents easier to get to. In
truth, I won't need to access the vast majority of documents, but on the off
chance I need one, it would sure suck hard not to have access to it. Keeping
all that paper around would be giving in to the fear that "I might need that
someday". I hate fear as a motivator. It's very powerful, but things often
turn out very poorly as a result. So DPTO and the ScanSnap allow me to make it
very cheap to keep all of this for the remote possibility that I'm going to
need it someday. All of this boils down to what I'll call Golden Rule #2:

> Never pay freight on something you "might" need.

DPTO can do a lot of things. I'm not sure I would really use it as my
"all-in-one" bucket. In a lot of ways it's a pretty fussy tool that, in my
opinion, takes a bit too much to maintain. However, just using it as a
document scanner and archiver makes it, to me, totally worth having.


# Backups #
Now I'm all for going digital, but doing so means that I've taken on the risk
of the inherent fragility of today's storage technology. Paper, in general,
doesn't fail for mysterious reasons (perhaps this is why MBTF isn't published
on the side of a ream of paper), but disks certainly do.

The only way I could move more things to digital and not put myself in a
potential crisis situation with a hardware failure was backups. Lots and lots
of backups. And not just one backup, but multiple backups. And not just on one
medium, but several. And not just in one location, but several.

So my current backup strategy now uses a combination of Time Machine, Super
Duper and Carbonite. I use Time Machine because it's the fastest backup that
saves me from the dumb accidental file delete. It's really a first-line of
defense and no more. 

I use [Super
Duper](http://www.shirt-pocket.com/SuperDuper/SuperDuperDescription.html) for local, full backups. What's great about Super Duper is
it's ability to create a bootable volume, which means that if my main drive
fails, I can still get to the information without necessarily having to fix
the main hard drive first. I use a rotating pair of LaCie drives and backup
every other day (I have a repeating OmniFocus task to remind me).

These are great tools, but they use a common medium (FireWire drives) and they
are in the same location (my house). I might solve the location problem by
coming up with some backup-swapping routine with someone I saw on a regular
basis. That is, each person would have two or more Super Duper backup disks,
and would routinely give one of them to a trusted source. You would then each
rotate your backups and at your next meeting, "trade" backup disks. I use
Espionage to encrypt my important data so I'm not worried about it falling
into the wrong hands.

I haven't done this yet. But even if I did, I'd want another form of backup,
so I bought a [Carbonite](http://www.carboniate.com) account to push data out to the "cloud". There are a
growing number of services out there like Carbonite and they probably work
just as well. The point here is peace of mind. It's like buying insurance.
Sure, it's very unlikely that my house is going to catch on fire and burn to
the ground with everything in it, but why worry about it at all? And if it did
happen, why make the loss worse. Sixty bucks a year seems like a pretty cheap
price to pay for the ability to sleep better at night. We'll call this Golden
Rule #3:

> Computers are great but fail. Make sure that fragility doesn't keep you up
> at night.

# Dropbox #
The last tool I'll mention is [Dropbox](http://www.dropbox.com). Dropbox is awesome for so many reasons
and I could go on and on about it. But what was really useful for me in this
context was the ability to selectively share documents with others. I have
some pretty serious, private documents going around that I don't just want to
stuff in an email. Yes, there are encrypted zip files and PDFs but there isn't
a good standard for the former across platforms and you still have the problem
of getting the password to the other party in a secure way.

With Dropbox I can share documents securely with my tax accountant. Hell, it's
even _easier_ than email because I don't have to deal with attachments and
anti-virus software mistakenly preventing my documents from being received.

Now not all lawyers and accountants are going to be down with such modern
technology. In our litigation-happy society people in these professions tend
to be pretty conservative in adapting new technologies. All I can say is that
I was very fortunate to work with the sort of folks that _would_ go along with
something like Dropbox.

# FAX Modem #
I can't believe I had to buy this thing, but given the spirit of the post, I
would be remiss if I didn't mention the humble little Zoom modem. It
is extraordinarily depressing and aggravating that in this day and age, the
vast majority of financial institutions out there will accept a fax, but won't
use email or some web-based tool.

At first I had earnestly hoped that things were going to change and that I
would only need to make the occasional trip to the local Kinko's to send a
four page fax for five bucks (thank you very much). As time went on though, I
realized that any companies willing to do business over the internet were the
exception rather than the rule. So, as much as I hated to do it, I finally had
to admit that we haven't really evolved as much as I'd hoped and had to trudge
down to the local Best Buy to buy a stupid little USB fax modem.

Now, as much as I hate the fact that I have to deal with faxes, the fax
software integrated into OS X makes it pretty easy. Most folks don't know that
printing a document in OS X is really a gateway to sending documents to all
sorts of interesting places (least of which is a printer).

For example, for a number of financial institutions I had to write a cover
letter and include court documentation to establish authority over my mother's
accounts. I could write the cover letter in Pages, insert the PDF document
then "print" it to the fax modem. The built-in fax print location even allows
you to optionally compose a cover page right in the dialog without the need
for including it in your documents.

Conversely, accepting a fax is pretty simple too. You plug in your modem, set
it up to receive calls. When you get the document, you can "print" anywhere.
In my case I would often "print" incoming documents straight into the
DEVONThink inbox where I could OCR-scan it and file it away for further use.
No need to print or scan a damn thing. Bits from one end to the other thank
you very much.

# Conclusion #
So what's this all about then? Why write this post? I'm no productivity guru,
but I felt like I found a good set of tools and techniques in this experience
that might be useful for others. None of these really help with dealing with
the unexpected loss of my mother, but they were a huge help in making the
onerous task of settling her Estate palpable and possible.

# Notes #
<div id="notes">
  <ol>
    <li>
      <a name="note1"></a>
      Actually the stuff I talk about here was really just a stop-loss
      program. I actually recovered/saved my sanity by taking up drum lessons.
    </li>
  </ol>
</div>
